today we're going to do a really quick
highle overview on database indexing and
so this is going to include talking
about uh what is an index what problem
does an index actually solve what are
the most common indexes and when should
you use them uh now as I said it'll be
high level and for much more detail
please head over to the hello interview
website and we have a deep dive on
database indexing I'll be sure to link
that in the description let's get after
it all right so before we start talking
about indexing let's understand the
problem that indexing solves so data is
arranged in a database in Pages pages
are usually 8 kilobytes of data and so
when you want to find a particular item
in your database and you're not using
indexing what happens is that we pull a
page into RAM into memory we scan
through all roughly a 100 rows or items
looking for the item that we're after
and if we don't find it we put that page
back pull in the next one put that one
back pull in the next one until we
eventually find it and so as you're
starting to realize this is a slow
process to illustrate this if we had a
100 million users in our user table and
each page as I said has maybe about 100
rows then that's a million of these
Pages now each round trip from SSD to
Ram is about 100 micros seconds and so
that's 100 seconds in the worst case for
us to find the item that we're looking
for now it's worth noting that in
reality there's pre-etching and there's
other database optimizations that would
probably actually get this down closer
to 3 to 5 seconds but the point stands
this is far longer than a user wants to
wait in order to get get a query for
some data for a given input ID so how do
indexes solve this problem for us well
indexes are just data structures that
are stored on disk and act as a map to
tell us where items or on which page
items exist in the database and so when
a new query comes in for a particular
item we first pull that index into
memory check which page that index tells
us the resource or the item lives on and
then we pull only that particular page
in this case maybe it was page one and
so as opposed to reading up to a million
Pages as was the cas case with our
sequential or table scan now we use the
index to just tell us exactly which page
we should look at so now naturally the
question becomes well what types of
indexes are there and when should I use
them let's start by first explaining
what is by far the most popular database
index which is the B tree and so B trees
are just basic tree structures just like
what you've learned in data structures
and algorithms where each node in the
tree is a sorted list of values with
pointers to another page in disk either
a child node as the case here or an
actual data page like here and so let's
illustrate this with an example I think
it'll make much more sense so let's say
that we had a query like this where we
want to select all users where their age
is exactly 51 and in our user table to
do this we built an index on age and so
this is the index on age these are all
the different ages of our users in our
users table and so the first thing that
we would do is we would pull in our root
node into memory so if we go back up to
our example up here that root node
itself each one of these blue boxes is a
page on disk and so we'd bring that guy
into memory we would look at it and we'd
say we want 51 so that's greater than 50
less than 90 so we're going to pull in
this page next that would pull in a
different index page and then we'd go in
here and look at it and say well 51 is
less than 55 and so which page does that
correspond to it corresponds to page
three and so we'd come up here and we'
pull page three into memory and that's
where all of the users that are age 51
exist now what if we were to do
something like this and we would change
this from an uh a Direct Value lookup to
a range query well in this case we're
going to pull in our index look at our
root and we're going to pull in both of
these blocks into memory this time this
one and this one because they're both
greater than 50 and now we're going to
follow the pointers in each of these so
all seven of them and we're going to
load all seven of those pages into
memory because that's all of our users
who are greater than 51
the next index worth discussing is
called a hash index and so hash index is
really straightforward it's just a
hashmap so again that exists in disk and
if you're looking for for example a user
with a given email you're going to pass
that email into a hash function and then
you're going to have some hashmap that
maps that key that hashed email to a
value where the value is just a pointer
of where that data exists on disk and so
for example in this case the data for
John his full row exists on page four
and so we're going to pull that into
memory now in reality and this is
important hash indexes are rarely
actually used in production databases so
while they offer 01 lookups which is
great um B trees perform nearly just as
well for exact matches but they also
support those range queries and sorting
that we were looking at just a moment
ago and so the only Places You'll
commonly see these hash indexes are for
inmemory stores things like Risk where
dis IO patterns aren't really that
relevant so it's good to know from a
historical con context perspective it's
useful for caching and other things but
typically in an actual database you're
going to offer a b tree not a hash
index okay so we get it B trees Rock and
they are great for the majority of use
cases but where instances especially in
a system design interview where you
wouldn't want to use a b tree well the
first place is anytime that you have
geospatial data specifically if you're
trying to search within regions on
latitude and longitude so think of a
system design interview like design yel
or find my nearby friends or something
you want everybody within a given radius
of something and so let's talk about why
B trees don't work really well in this
case so if I had a query that was
something like this I want all of the
locations that have a Latitude greater
than 100 less than 400 and a longitude
greater than 20 less than 200 so be
trees really excel at onedimensional
data but not two-dimensional data like
this and the reason is really easy to
illustrate and so if we look at this
diagram here that query would give us
all of this data for latitude all of
this data for longitude and then we're
going to load both of those things into
memory and then do a fairly expensive
merge until we get this middle area
which is what we actually care about and
so we still needed to get each of these
long strips fold them into memory and do
the merge is there a more efficient way
to do that and the answer is yes there
are specialized indexes or sometimes
just algorithms before the indexing
called geospatial indexing and the three
most popular and the three best to know
for system design interviews are one
geohashing two quad trees and three R
trees and we're going to really briefly
go over each of these so first up let's
let's look at geohashing with geohashing
you take the map of the World Imagine
that's what this is and we split it into
four parts we label the top left zero
then one then two then three now we can
then recursively split each of those
cells and do the same thing such that
this one is now two 2 1 22 23 and by
continuing to do this we get increasing
levels of precision such that maybe the
New Mexico area is 31 but Albuquerque
specifically is 310
now the nice thing is once you've
converted latitude and longitude into
these one-dimensional strings here um
then now all nearby locations share a
similar prefix and so this is Chihuahua
I guess if we want to find everything
near Chihuahua at this degree of
precision then we just get the geohashes
near it 321 331 312 and 332 and they all
share similar prefixes and so what we do
is we actually create the geohashes and
then just build a b Tree on top of of
the hashes themselves which allow us to
easily do these range queries and these
o of one or nearly o of one lookups on
precise areas um and that's how
geohashing works now it's worth noting
that I did this as just simple numbers
for the illustration we actually base 32
and code them and so for example Los
Angeles where I'm at is this that's the
geohash for Los Angeles next up is quad
trees it's pretty similar to geohashing
and that we split the world recursively
but there are a couple subtle
differences the first is that we map
this recursive splitting actually to a
tree not a onedimensional string and we
only need to go deeper in this tree in
the places where we have high density so
let me show you what this means imagine
this was a map of the world and each dot
is a location in our database say this
was Yelp each dot is a business and so
we split the world into four grids we
thus create a tree where the tree has
four children and that points to all of
the businesses within that grid so all
of the red businesses all the green
businesses is this node blue and yellow
respectively now you'll notice there's a
lot of density in the blue cell here and
so with quad trees you specify a k value
which is basically saying that if any
cell has greater than K value items then
recursively split and so that was the
case here we had more than five so we
split it again and we can come over here
and we had another four children right
one two 3 four and then one such
children or child still had more than
five so we split it again and so 1 2 3
four right and so now when we want to
find a particular business we just work
our way down the tree accordingly and
this is the index similar to the B tree
that ends up being stored on disk lastly
we have archeries archeries are derived
from quad trees they're really similar
concept but instead of just crudely
splitting the world into even fours it's
a bit more Dynamic it does some
clustering in order to find locations or
businesses or whatever it may be in your
database that are close to each other
and then each of these kind of larger
groupings can even have a little bit of
of overlap and so it's the same general
idea we work down a tree in order to get
increasing Precision from M this larger
box to I this box and then finally to
all the businesses or locations in F uh
it's just not the case that we need to
be so stringent in splitting exactly in
force it's a bit more Dynamic and
obviously fairly complex and not
something we're going to go into detail
in this video what's important to note
as we zoom out and look at all three of
these strategies is that geohashing is
very popular today it exists in things
like reddis it's the default um many
production databases rely on geohashing
it's a fantastic option it's quick it
gets to rely on database indexes that
already exist like B trees and you just
have an algorithm on the front end quad
trees were foundational into the
development of geospatial indexes but
are actually not really used in
production much nowadays instead their
predecessor archeries are what used in
production and so like postgis the
extension that enables geospatial
indexing on postgress for example uses
archeries and so the important thing is
that in a system design interview if you
get tasked with a situation where you
have two dimensional data specifically
on latitude and longitude then you know
that you're going to want to introduce
some geospatial index and you might
mention to your interviewer that you
understand the difference between each
of these uh and specify the one that you
want to go with in that particular
situation let's look at another place
where berries might not be a good choice
for your database index in this case we
want to select to all businesses that
have pizza in the name now the reason
that a beet Tre is not great here is
because if you remember beet trees were
sorted and so in the case of strings
this means they're sorted
lexicographically and so this would be
great if it was a prefix search if we
were looking for things that started
with pizza well your Beach Tre is
awesome but if we want things that have
pizza anywhere in the name well we have
no choice but to do that dreaded Full
Table scan again we have to pull in
every single page and look at all of
them and so instead what we should do is
we should create something called an
inverted index and so inverted indexes
are great anytime that you need to
search for text and so this is how we
would do it you can imagine that we have
three documents document one which says
berries are fast and reliable document
two hash tables are fast but limited doc
three be Tre handle range query as well
you get the picture now what we can do
is we can create a map a hash map
mapping each of the words that appear or
the tokens that appear to all of the
documents that they appear in and so now
now if this was maybe something like
Fast uh we want to get all of the
documents in this example that we have
down here that have the word fast in it
well this is easy we're just going to
look up fast and then find all the
documents that map to fast and this is
going to be up maybe pointers to the
pages that these obviously exist in
memory or on disk and we'll pull those
into memory and then uh return those
rows so this is inverted indexes
inverted indexes used in things like
elastic search postgress full text
search anytime you're doing full text
search you want to inverted indexes in
your system design interview if you need
to search over something with full text
you'll want to mention uh that you'll
need one of those Technologies which
supports an inverted
index okay so to wrap up I have a
confession to make it's not likely in
your actual interview that you're going
to get deep into the implementation of
each of these indexes instead what's
most important that you understand where
your queries might be inefficient which
columns you should apply indexes to and
then depending on the case if there is a
special index that needs to be applied
and so this is a useful flowchart that
that you should keep in mind the first
is do you need efficient data access
well if the answer is no Then Full Table
scans sure that's fine if it's yes then
do you have a lot of rows in your table
if you don't then you can stick to the
Full Table scan it's not a lot of work
to pull those pages into memory and read
from them but if it's a yes then you
have a simple question and I'm going to
zoom in here and that's the what type of
data are you querying if you're querying
for text Data then you're going to want
an inverted index elastic search Lucine
full teex search and postgress these all
will give you an inverted index if
you're searching for location data then
you need a geospatial index so reddis
with geohashing post extension on
postgress elastic searches
implementation which I think uses a
combination of geohash and archery don't
quote me on that um do you need exact
matches in memory that are fast well
maybe consider a hash index um but also
be be wary that maybe a b tree is still
the best option and then for literally
everything else go with a B tree so that
wraps up our really quick Deep dive into
database indexing we'll do more of these
short-term form videos we'll also go
back to the long form as well but let me
know in the comments what you think if
you have any questions and I'll see you
all soon good luck with your interviews